Whenever I’m playing Overwatch, I’ve
started gravitating toward Soldier 76
when my favorite killer robot with
PTSD, Bastian, isn’t practical.
I didn’t play as Soldier for the first few years
the game was out though. But then Blizzard, the
company behind Overwatch, revealed that Soldier
was gay and, well, I Stan a gay video game daddy.
But did you know that gay characters have
actually been in video games for over 30 years?
The first known game to feature a queer character,
at least in the west, was MoonMist in 1986.
More games like this popped up with queer
characters in the years to come, mainly for
the Apple II and the Commodore 64. Circuit’s
Edge, and Caper in the Castro among them.
Nintendo even got in on it with Birdo, a character
from the American version of Super Mario Bros 2
who, in the game’s manual, was described as a man
who likes dressing up and going by the name of
“Birdetta”. They’ve, of course, done
everything they can to pretend this
never happened ever since because,
well, Nintendo gonna Nintendo.
However, despite Japan’s seemingly
inherent social conservatism,
Most of the time, queer characters were actually
purposefully censored for the West, mostly
removing bits of dialogue from NPCs in games
such as Phantasy Star II or Streets of Rage 3.
In America, only adventure and computer games made
direct references to queer characters early on,
but they were often stereotyped. The first
speaking role for a gay character, for example,
was in the FMV game Dracula Unleashed,
but the character was an overt pervert.
And that’s kind of how it stayed for a long
time for Western gaming. Even in the late
90s when the industry became dominated by the
hyper heterosexualization of characters like
Duke Nukem and Lara Croft. The closest we really
came to queer representation was straight boys
saying that hulking female villains in beat-em-up
games were transgender. Or Cloud in a dress.
With some very minor examples in
computer games that used the presence
of a queer character to market the game
as edgy and adult only, we mostly didn’t
exist in the world of pixels and polygons.
The modern video game industry as a whole was
only about eighteen years old. But it was about
to go off to college and start to experiment.
Early queerness in video games wasn’t
really a... thing anybody was asking for.
Mario saving Princess Peach from Bowser
was less of a dramatic or narrative option
and more just a reason to have you play the
game. Believe it or not, early video games had
relatively little to do with romance options,
in the era of side scrollers and platformers.
The advent of the RPG and turn-based fighting
games meant that narrative games didn’t have
to be done with text-commands anymore. There was
a story, sure, and yes, if romance was a thing,
it was going to be heterosexual. And nobody was
really fighting for queer rep in these games
because queer communities had
other priorities at the time.
Namely… survival.
And when it did come to queer representation,
activists were pushing for being seen in much
more visible media like television and movies.
So no. Gay developers and gamers and activists
weren’t really pushing for queer representation
in whatever JRPG you remember playing… Even
though we showed up to show our support
when the siren called.
Through the gaming generation
of Xbox and Playstation 2,
there was a period of experimentation. This
is back when moving with one thumb-stick
and aiming with the other was
a revolutionary new mechanic.
This also was roughly the same
time that home computers became
a ubiquitous necessity in households.
The early 2000s era of game development was when
the industry was really figuring out how gaming
was going to transition to a high-fidelity visual
experience. Especially now that games could store
audio information much more clearly than
before — leading to game development
that was able to record dialogue that
matched the encroaching photorealism.
Retrospectively, developers might have argued that
each game they produced was highly calculated…
but it seems to me that nobody was
really sure of what would be a hit,
and what would sink. These five, maybe
10 years were met with an influx of games
that were indicative of an industry that
was still trying to figure itself out.
Before the giant corporations started
telling them what needed to be popular.
A large chunk of the industry kept
trying to use mascot branding to
sell E-rated games and wacky characters,
most of whom would wind up in obscurity.
A sizable chunk was trying to capitalize
off of the success of Doom, Duke Nukem,
and other gritty hyperviolence in an appeal to
gamers who had freshly aged out of needing their
parents to buy games for them. Very few were
trying to push video games into the realm of
interactive realism — which is where the
industry believes games need to be today.
But before the major gaming companies
really began to corporatize,
there were a few… really weird ways
that these developers began pushing
the envelope. And though it may be a
microtransaction machine these days,
few people remember just how much of an
impact The Sims had on the gaming world.
It was a create-your-character RPG RTS without a
story. There was no narrative, no plot, no victory
conditions — there were only game mechanics.
Any story that existed was created by the user.
And the objective? Just… exist. Buy expensive
stuff. Own property. Get promoted in your career.
…Things that are still only possible
in video games for millennials.
Who needs a retirement plan? I’ve got
six mansions and a husband in the sims.
It’s not that games like this didn’t exist
before this, it’s just that they were…
Simple. Straightforward. Either text command
based, or choose your own adventure. And they
always had a continuous, driving objective. The
Sims had no objective. There was… no reason to
play the game aside from having a good time. By
all accounts on paper — there was no reason for
anyone in management to sign off on this
game. It was too simple to be bankable.
The growing video game market was leaning
towards action, challenge, and violence.
But it turns out people really liked being
able to live in a house and have several
friends and have a job where you could
get promoted into being an astronaut.
And somehow, in this game, it managed
to be possible for two sexy, ripped,
pixelated men to totally get naked
and get in the same bed together.
Was it design oversight? Someone slipping in
a code? The design philosophy of the game was
to be as unrestrictive to players
as possible so… maybe it was just
always intended to be there. Granted,
same-gender marriage was impossible,
but you could form romantic attachments to
and move in with same-gender characters.
But the chief significance
about gayness in The Sims
was how little the game cared
about whether you did it or not.
It was just there. What’s even more absurd
is the blending of child-like animations,
mechanics, and all around sense of michivious
fun with actual video game toons having sex.
Or at least the euphemism The
Sims uses for sex: woohoo.
In fact, in more recent sims games,
and the addition of more age brackets,
even gay teenagers can woohoo. And
yes, Gay marriage has been added to
later games and even more customization
around gender, and gender expressions.
Choosing a male or female body type and selecting
either or both sets of gendered clothing.
I have to wonder how things would
be progressing without the Sims’
lazyfair approach to gender
pairings? Knowing how parent
company EA feels about games needing to
be ‘safe’ as possible to make a profit,
I don’t know whether they’d be so open about
this same approach if they had to choose now.
Can we really be aware of the doors
the Sims opened up? Would we have gay
characters in narrative games now, if it
wasn’t for this everyday life simulator?
Four years later, you could find this
same attitude towards gay coupling, though
in an adventure game. Fable branded itself as…
well, leading up to release, they said it would be
many things to many people — legendarily
— but it was not. Which sucks because even
without the weird Lionshead promises, it was
still a fun romp. Kinda half-baked, but fun.
We couldnt do everything lead
designer Peter Moluneu said we could,
But one thing you could do… was be gay.
In retrospect it seems a little problematic.
You, the heroic protagonist, never spoke nor
did you have a name. And any one who was
available for marriage was a procedurally
generated villager who was generally half as
tall as you. Though still. This is a world where
homophobia didn’t exist and that was nice.
The second game was more or less the same,
but with additional parenthood mechanics and
very inconsistent rules about condom use.
But like I said this depiction did run a little
bit… shallow. There’s generally no impact to being
gay whatsoever. And while the fantasy is nice,
the trilogy of games does follow a bloodline, so
canonical heteronormative conformity is to
be taken for granted. It would have been
a bit nicer to have some queerness
addressed by the plot, wouldn't it?
Maybe even queerness being related to the plot?
One could argue “well what were we going
to expect for gays in video games?”
“What? Were you looking for games built around
gayness? What kind of lib-tard nonsense is that?
It’s not like straightness is a
driving component of video games!”
So Kratos, an ancient greek spartan, can
literally lay so many women he breaks
the furniture, but we can’t have one
game where being gay impacts the plot?
For some reason, this was a
much taller order. Actually
get a fully-written gay character who
has meaningful contributions to a plot?
Much less a fully voiced one. And perish
the thought of it being a protagonist.
Thus rose the first cop-out of
gays in gaming: The Gay NPC.
Not even the fem NPC who has a few
auspicious dialogue interactions in an RPG.
Outside of the ambiguously camp Final Fantasy
henchvillian, we did begin to see a rise of
core-cast secondary characters who were
either coded as queer, or who very subtly
outed themselves, given the right dialoge options.
Which… given that at this point, marriage equality
was very much still up for debate in America, the
fact that we even got this was a pivotal step.
And in all honesty, in many cases, it was
handled very respectfully. But many of you
may be surprised to know that one of the
earliest (high-profile) examples of this
came out of Star Wars.
Yes. Before Saint Abrams deigned to give
us an exactly 3-second lesbian interaction,
LucasArts served up this angsty, angry, claws-out
catgirl. Who, if shown mercy after attacking the
main character, can be recruited. And if said
main character is a woman, can be flirted with.
And if you don’t show her mercy,
another NPC alluded to be her ex
gets REALLY mad at you later on.
Juhani’s queerness is subtle. And
she can be sensitive about it if you
pick it up too soon. But if you follow
through with enough dialogue options,
she does open up as a vaguely established
romantic option... but only for other ladies.
Queer rep wasn’t a main staple of the Knights
of the Old Republic series… or Bioware as a
whole until Dragon Age many years later. But
every other queer character in a video game
would inevitably follow in Juhani’s footsteps.
The NPC. In fact it seems shocking at all that
even an allusion to a Juhani
romance would be in KOTOR 1,
given how queer characters were relegated
to being side-characters played for laughs.
But it’s been a long 20 years.
A very. Very. Long… 20… Years—
And in that 20 years, the
landscape of video games,
both in terms of player-bases, accessibility,
tropes, technology, development, and business,
has shifted remarkably quickly. With the growing
attention of prestige directed at video games,
there’s been an increasing demand to see a greater
spectrum of identities represented in games.
And for better and for worse, the industry
leaders — trying to attract new players and
tap into new markets — have been trying very hard
to have queer inclusion without alienating a very
dedicated (though questionabley sized) fanbase
that loves to scream F** over the team chat.
So the game industry is trying
to give representation without
biting the hand that they think feeds them.
Which is leading to new problems and
new cop-outs to have gay representation,
while avoiding haveing anything that might
be construed as outright gay representation.
From about the year 2000 and onward, video
games went through huge changes. Specifically on
the scope of what a game could depict, and how
much information could be written into a game.
Photorealistic textures, combined with
increased processing power in consoles
allowed ‘immersion’ to be a much more
significant element of gameplay experiences.
Furthermore, the amount of storage space on disks
allowed the branching-narrative style
of text adventure games to easily
translate into fully-rendered 3D environments.
And this transition happened very quickly.
In branching-narrative games, entire
sections could become inaccessible
due to decisions you make. Dialogue options,
going this place before another place,
solving certain puzzles, and
morality choices could determine
whether a character died earlier, or was
a reoccurring character. Like Juhani.
Knights of the Old Republic, released in 2003,
was an early example of a guided
narrative with branching options.
But other studios like Bethesda were pioneering
open-world games like Daggerfall in 1996,
and the much-beloved Morrowind in 2002. However
in all cases, these games were massive in scope.
So much so that most of the game
would never be played by most gamers.
This is significant because… this is where queer
representation could be hidden in plain sight.
It would have made sense that queer characters
would be more easily found in platform games
which would take much less time to build,
and whose focus would be gameplay mechanics
rather than narrative ones. For instance, what
would it matter if a fighting game roster had
a character who was mentioned to be gay in the
character bio? Most people never read that stuff!
And yet, in this world of massively
expansive and expensive choice-based RPGs
was where we found our first major
representation. And… where we still
find the overwhelming majority of our
representation today. Game execs read
the room and realized that gays flock to tabletop
gaming and nerd culture like you wouldn’t believe.
And the gaming industry also learned that the
gays will flock to stores to buy copies of a game
if a friend of theirs told them that there
was a gay character somewhere in there.
Thus set a precedence for the most annoying
one-foot-in instances when it
comes to queer depictions in media.
See, immersion-based games function best where
the player’s own personality is a component of
the gameplay experience. You’re a soft, sensitive
love-conquers-all type? There’s dialogue options
for you. You’re a no-nonsense, any-means-necessary
mercenary type? There are options for you.
I do think it’s hilarious though that developers
allowed options to comit genocide and war crimes
before they let us say yes homo.
This opened the door for them to sneak in queer
representation to tap into a queer audience
without explicitly offending the
fragile sensebilities of big, tough,
heterosexual ‘True Gamers’. If gay romance is
an option… then there is an option to ignore it.
This is creating a very weird precedent in gaming
and… well is something I’m becoming annoyed with.
See. If you have a character creation
screen. And you create a black character.
Is that developer committing to a
game featuring black representation?
No. They’re simply giving you the option. The
game will not actually portray a black experience.
Instead, we look to the side-characters and quest
companions for that diversity. Which, itself,
is problematic — as most of these games
take place in sci-fi or fantasy settings.
Mass Effect is a culprit of
this. You run into a problem
where you have science fiction properties
where the aliens are meant to be an analogy
of ‘ethnic’ people, whereas the humans are
the shoe-ins for Euro-American culture.
In fact it isn’t until Mass Effect 3 that the game
clarifies that yes non-American
cultures do exist in humanity.
The thing about having a gay romance option in a
game though — where you can choose what gameplay
experience you have — is that I don’t think
we can actively qualify it as representation.
The funny thing is. We actually got queer
representation since the beginning of
BioWare’s progressively complex mission
to present sex scenes to gamers on the
brink of discovering masturbation,
by having two rendered models of
lifeless marionettes in painted-on
underwear clipping into each-other.
Like I said, Juhani in Star Wars, but
Liara of Mass Effect, who is from an
“all-female” species, is a romance option
for both genders of the player character.
This… carries on in Mass Effect 2 where there is
once again a couple of lesbian-inclusive ladies.
And no. It’s not her.
And not her either.
Which culminates in Mass Effect
3 where there are a whopping
5 bisexual-or-lesbian romance options
next to… one… bisexual romancable man.
Which is laying the groundwork for
another odd situation. In Mess Effect 3,
there are more bisexual women
than there are straight ones.
Which isn’t me saying we need less
lesbians or bisexuals in gaming,
it’s me saying that developers are dangling
lesbians on a string to titillate straight men.
Bisexual women are especially appealing
to developers because they’re under the
impression that straight men
fantacise about MFF threesomes.
But only when they have
impossible waist-ass ratios.
It’s not representation if it’s exploitation.
And this is an ongoing problem in BioWare
content, across Mass Effect and Dragon Age.
Because even when they pat themselves
on the back for having gay and lesbian
exclusive characters in Dragon Age:
Inquisition, they still have a much
higher ratio of bisexual women, and a
large cast of exclusively straight men.
(Mass Effect Andromeda is an
exception to this rule and is
the crowning highlight of the series
— no I will not be taking questions.)
But when it comes to Bioware, is it really
representation if you can opt-out of it?
Despite the number of queer characters
in BioWare games, it’s outstandingly easy
to make a play-through that simply does
not have queer characters in it at all.
In Dragon Age, You can kill Zervan before you
talk to him. You can kill Anders at the end of
the game, maybe he’s flirted with you by then?
And both Dorian and Sera are optional recruits.
In the core Mass Effect, yes there’s Liara and
other Asari, but other queer characters are
generally out of the way or unessential. And for
queerness, you have to dig for it unless you’re
playing Andromeda and everyone is very keen to
let you know that they want in your space pants.
In order for it to qualify as representation,
I feel like it needs to do more than just…
let us, queer gamers, choose to see ourselves.
Seeing ourselves is important, but it’s
also important to be seen by others.
Representation’s role in activism doesn’t end
with making queer content intended to be seen
only by queer people. Representation has the
additional goal of normalizing otherwise fringe
identities. And bear in mind even suburban gays
were considered ‘on the fringe’ not that long ago.
And identities cannot be normalized if:
They are unseen by hegemony-conforming audiences.
Or when They are depicted fetishisticly.
Choice-based sexuality has a
lot of weird implications too.
Primarily, the old tune that
being gay itself is a choice.
Claiming that real-life people ‘choose’ to be
gay probably isn’t going to be what most people
take away from a gaming experience. But I don’t
know how long the rest of you have been living
on this planet, but people really do seem
to have an aversion to thinking rationally.
Especially when it comes to
straight, cisgender communities.
Bear in mind this is the same group that set
California on fire with a gender-reveal pipe bomb.
HOWEVER! Given just how common it is
for homophobes to believe that being
gay or trans is a choice, I’m not sure
that we need to re-enforce that idea.
Another problem with choice-based romance options
is that the sexual orientation of the protagonist
is never really called to attention.
Neither by other elements within the
game nor in the ways these relationships pan out.
Well, Ignorable queerness in video games
condones queer erasure while pretending
to champion our rights. Take for instance the
character Dorian from the Dragon Age series.
Leading up to and following release, Dorian
was pushed as a milestone for gaming — the
first fully-voiced, exclusively
gay man to be in a major RPG.
When you first meet Dorian — you can
point-blank tell him you don’t want
him around. And he’ll leave forever. Same with
Sera, the exclusively lesbian character who got
considerably less press despite the fact
that she’s basically the only likeable
and interesting character in that game. I
feel in order to qualify as representation,
there needs to be unmissable, unavoidable
queer character confrontation.
Other games have gotten around this by having
queer side-characters. Very… small roles,
granted. The Witcher 3, while… gratuitously
heterosexual, opens up one of the first story
quests by seeking out help from a hunter who was
involved with a local lord’s son. Who ended up
committing suicide because kill your gays.
Later on, Geralt encounters a genderfluid
elf as part of a mandatory quest. But b oth
of these instances last about 5 minutes so…
That also kinda sucks because once again, it’s
not that it’s ignorable but… it is forgettable.
Funny thing. The Witcher 3 spends a significant
amount of time following Ciri, Geralt’s adoptive
daughter. And while playing as her, there is
a dialogue option to out herself as a lesbian.
Which, the world of the Witcher
is a little bit homophobic so
approaching that so casually
feels a little… forced?
Which reflects another weird problem
around choice-based sexuality in gaming.
If you’re queer in any way, in the real
world, things are different. It’s not
always about discrimination — in fact,
some things are better. Like not having
your parents ask you when you’re going to
get married or give them grandchildren.
...Well we USED to have that.
Congratulations to gay rights for removing our
abilities to set boundaries with our parents.
There is a different, albeit subtle
social feedback. While in a science
fiction atmosphere like Star Wars or Mass
Effect, it’s acceptable to say that this is
a period of time when humankind has shrugged
off hang-ups around sexual orientation.
(And yet it’s still more acceptable
to boink an alien than another dude.)
In games like Dragon Age or the Witcher
or other medeval-set fantasy worlds,
there’s — apparently greater creative licence
to depict extreme homophobia which is actually…
kind of off and ironic.
So. Mass Effect takes place in a future
version of this world. Which means that
it’s a world which has endured racism, sexism, and
homophobia. And yet, there’s a greater acceptance
that these are worlds where sexuality would be
unrestricted, racism has more or less ended...
And yet, fantasy worlds are usually presented
to us as other worlds. As in, their worlds never
underwent mass-christianization. In fact, many of
these fantasy worlds involve a form of polytheism.
Whereas, in our world the major reason why we
have institutional homophobia — at least in
Roman-derived cultures, is because
of the Christianization process which
prosecuted barbarian cultures for relatively
liberal viewpoints on who can have sex with whom.
Homophobia in our world is arbitrary — but
it’s even more arbitrary in fantasy worlds.
Which means that every queer character
getting their moment where they
step up on a soap box to harp about how love is
love feels abundantly arbitrary. Or how their
culture has super weird and uncommon ways
of giving gay sex the stamp of approval.
Which, in spite of the gay persecution in fantasy
worlds, nobody really… reacts to queerness.
“Oh look there goes the Inquisitor.
Commander of legions, advisor to empires,
unparalleled warrior, and
wielder of arcane secrets.
He’s gonna go take it right up the butt
from the giant bull man. Thumbs up.”
Because a huge portion of queer experiences
is coping with the way that society changes
it’s treatment of you. Either relative to before
you came out, or to your heteronormative peers.
Your amalgom of gay romance pixals has to explain
in great detail why their same-sex affections are
valid and justified. But literally NOBODY else
in the damn story makes a big deal out of it.
You could argue that there’s only so much
content that developers can commit to,
and that’s valid. But at the same
time if gay representation matters
so much to them why don’t they put the
care into figuring out the little nuances?
Not that I’m calling for
more crunch in the industry.
But depending on the degree of bigotry in a given
video game, you would need to record duplicates of
entire character interactions to appropriately
capture the subtle ways that people treat queer
or straight identities. Which may get impractical…
But Red Dead Redemption 2 has a specifically built
engine for animated horse balls, so maybe their
attention could stand to be pointed elsewhere.
In the same way I struggled with Assassin’s
Creed: Odyssey. Where you have the option of
playing as a male or female protagonist. And how
there was almost no difference in dialogue lines,
or social treatment of the main characters from
one gender or the other. While this is great for
modern representation, Ancient Greece was one of
the most misogynistic cultures in human history.
In ancient Greece — wealthy homes were divided
into two sections so men and women would not
interact with each-other. There was a significant
seperation of sex-equality. To the point where
ancient Hellenic myths about the Amazons depicted
them so terrifyingly because the concept of a
woman warrior was absurd. To be historically
accurate, Assassin’s Creed: Odyssey would have
needed to be two games — and playing as a woman
would have added a massive layer of difficulty.
Which… would have been a cool way to have
an easy mode and a hard mode. Especially
because Ubisoft considered the Cassandra
character to be canonical. And you know,
being a straight man of privilege with a good
body is pretty much god’s easy mode as it is.
Granted it makes a little more sense in Valhalla,
where Vikings held masculine women, effeminate
men, and queerness in much higher esteem. Even
though Valhalla also has the additional problem of
seeing straight and gay romantic
interactions as being interchangeable.
So yes… being a gay person and having experienced
homophobia… these relatively shallow depictions
are a little bit irritating. And for me,
they break the immersion a little bit.
A weird saving grace is a property like
Skyrim. Which is not shy about existing
almost entirely detached from this world.
And you can just walk right up to Farkas
with an Amulet of Mara and marry the
big dumb werewolf boy and adopt kids.
It’s so comically simple. There’s literally no
social hang-ups over gay marriages. Same thing
in Fallout New Vegas and Fallout 4. It’s just
a thing you can do. NPC companions don’t really
have a different way of interacting with men
than they do with women. Why would they? They’re
living in the apocalypse! But we’re living
in the apocalypse too, so what’s our excuse?
But even in science fiction post-utopias,
this feels a little off. In the same way
that every non-human species in Mass Effect
refers to everything by acronyms derived
from English. In the same way that feet
clip through the ground when a character walks up
a ramp. We need some kind of connection to this
world to remind us that it’s based on our
world. It just feels a little… too smooth.
And maybe this is our future, but for us
in this world, we like our wish fulfilment
with a little bit of context that acknowledges
the world that we, the audience, live in. We,
after all, continue to struggle with problems
in queerness. And not all of our problems are,
as the cis-het developer management beleive,
about battling homophobia. Within queer spaces,
we face a number of problems that
have very little to do with bigotry,
but rather existing in a world that is primarily
designed for baby-rearing heterosexual coupling.
Once again, Andromeda was much
better at setting up this context.
In Andromeda, certain same-sex relationships
didn’t face homophobia, but they did address
gay problems. Specifically, in the romance
with the exclusively gay character Gil Brodie,
a large portion of it is built around the
question of surrogacy and shared parentage.
And it just feels like the writers spent some
actual time thinking about what elements of gay
relationship hang-ups would carry over into
a society that had largely shed homophobia.
Which is the next problem with
choice-based queerness. Queer relationships
are different than straight
ones. Not even in a bad way.
It’s just a matter of gender roles. Even if
you pretend that society has not developed
with any pre-existing framework that favours
heterosexual coupling over homosexual ones.
Two men interacting with each-other romantically
is going to be different from the experiences of
one man and one woman together. Which will,
in turn, be different from how things would
work with two women, or a pairing that involves
a nonbinary person, or a polycule of any size.
But when you have bisexual characters in games,
their dialogue lines are exactly identical,
barring pronouns. Their treatment of the main
character is identical. There’s no functional
difference in how this relationship works. Which…
maybe that’s how it’ll be in the future. But for
now, most accounts I’ve heard from bisexual
people in relationships is that they can
sometimes have vastly different mechanics
depending on the gender of their partner.
This is true even if they have no
specific preference for any gender.
It’s all other peoples’ bullshit. You
just learn to adapt to it differently.
But wouldn’t queer people in narrative
games kinda solve all these problems?
Every single one? Confrontational representation?
Controlled queer expiriences? Creating a
narrative statement on the state of being queer?
It might not be too far off that
we start seeing some of that.
Games which no longer present straightforward
and cis-hetero romantic expectations. And,
more importantly, present a kind of
queerness you can’t look away from.
The main concern that I have when it comes
to depicting gays in… media in general is:
“Can it be ignored?”
In film and television, it’s a matter of
deconstructing the coding, or gauging what
value a random gay kiss has to the overarching
plot and if it’s something that could be
hypothetically removed so that it can get screened
in Russia or China. But at the end of it all,
I really am having a discussion
about visibility in media, aren’t I?
How visible are we? Again, can we be ignored?
Many times where we are told
something has queer representation,
the queer people are made invisible
somehow. We are told we are represented. We are
told we are seen. And yet, we do not feel seen.
Video games are a challenge to this model because
in many ways a video game bypasses directorial
intent. Video games, in many cases, are used to
tell non-linear stories. And even when they are
linear, a game experience can change vastly
depending on how a player approaches certain
challenges, what pieces of lore are missed or
how deeply a player engages with visual elements.
Giving the player the choice whether or not
to engage with the game’s story and lore
is becoming oddly commonplace in the industry.
This is abundantly clear in games
like the Soulsborne franchise.
Details about the world and even
the plot are never really clear.
You can go along in the game and just do what
NPCs tell you to do. Depending upon what you
do and who you speak to in the game, you may
or may not have a clue as to what’s going on.
Whereas that’s much more difficult to do
in linear media, where everything you see
is the way it is because it was crafted to release
information, emotions, and visuals in a specific
order. It’s not impossible. For instance there are
films like Citizen Cane, Memento, or Pulp Fiction
that rearrange narrative chronology so that
information can be withheld from the viewer,
and things become more clear
after the whole film is seen.
Even movies like Black Swan that don’t play
with chronological structure accomplish
this by both obscuring details and forcing the
viewer to question what is and is not reality.
Leading to you, the viewer, developing your
own opinion of what events are occurring.
The same is very true of Soulsborne-style
games — where world-building is done
primarily through reading
the descriptions of items.
You pick up scraps of inference and
strong hints about the world you’re in.
And this is important, believe it or not,
for framing a discourse about what queer
representation in video games can look like.
Because this feeds into the problem of whether
a queer side-character in a video game can
be accurately described as representation.
And the answer is… they usually can’t.
Side-characters in films are elements of the
story. This is true for video games also, but
story is only one component of a video game, and
sometimes… isn’t the primary draw for a video game
and can be (and maybe sometimes
should be) ignored completely.
And if the purpose of representation
is to normalize fringe identities,
then confrontation is necessary.
Which means queer characters need to be an ongoing
and clearly defined element of the narrative.
Which… the gamer bros are going
to complain about that but
they complain when even optional gay characters
aren’t just there to be a punchline so
let them complain. Let us not give
a shit about the opinions of idiots.
That said, a good way to make a game
undeniable queer is to just to… you know…
make the main character queer.
The Last of Us 2 didn’t really make history
as the game with the first gay protagonist,
but it was indeed the first to come out of a major
studio. And it was met with an incredibly divided,
and often harsh, response from fans of
the first game who didn’t like that this
game killed off a man for no other reason
than the emotional development of a woman.
… How’s it feel guys?
Never-mind that Ellie as the protagonist was
something set up from the prior game and that it
wouldn’t have mattered if they killed Joel or not,
these same shit nuggets wouldn’t have had anything
nice to say about it anyway. And while Ellie’s
sexuality is certainly an element of the plot,
it is only tangentially related
to the progression of the story.
As in, Ellie’s bisexual girlfriend
is pregnant from her ex-boyfriend and
that is addressed as Ellie goes about her
revenge mission. Which is the main plot.
But it’s not like her queerness is defined by
having to escape an extremeist cult that is
trying to kill her for being queer. Surely
we’re moving past the point where queer
characters can only resolve conflicts that
relate directly to combating bigotry, right?
And this… is the part of the video where we
talk about the highs and lows of The Last of
Us 2’s queer rep. Yes. Ellie is out and proud
and her queerness has nothing to do with the
progression of her plot. And honestly that’s
what we’re looking out for. At least I am.
Because when it comes to expensive media projects
— usually, our queerness is the plot. Queer media
is about queer people whose queerness is
the driving conflict of their queer story.
It’s been the only story we’re allowed to
inhabit in mainstream media since… ever.
But we’re moving into a generation of
queer creators who are so completely over
‘the gay plot’ that they’re crafting
stories in which sexuality is irrelevant.
Where these stories are not ‘queer stories’ —
but instead, stories experienced by queer people.
Ellie’s on a revenge quest. It’s not even revenge
for the gay bashing of a girlfriend. It’s a more
universal story about the human condition. For
which there are plenty of straight versions.
But the elements of the story around
character, and character interactions,
are slightly modified because
one or more characters are queer.
Abby’s story falls into the problem of
‘the queer victim.’ Abby is Ellie’s rival
and a POV character in the game. She herself is
not gay, or nonbinary she’s just… really jacked.
When you start out with Abby,
one of the first things you do
is save a post-apocalyptic trans
man, Lev, from a post-apocalyptic
religious cult that — go figure — hates
trans people for no discernable reason.
Abby’s story is almost entirely built around
surviving Ellie, but also helping Lev survive
this cult who keeps trying to kill him.
Sometimes she has to save Lev from Ellie.
Ellie doesn’t wanna kill him because he’s trans,
but as part of her mission to
kill Abby and all of her friends.
Still, this turns into one of many instances
where, because media needs to be so thoroughly
framed from and for the perspective of privilege,
that a story about queer identity becomes a story
that focuses more on anti-queer bigotry.
Just like how a lot of black-framed movies
made by white people focus more about the
racist people’s journey into acceptance.
Coming from privilege, it’s very easy to
make a story about bigotry and focus on
the bigoted people’s feelings and justifications.
And there have been other critics of The Last
of Us 2 who claimed the game seems to validate
queer identity on the ability of queer people
to endure suffering. Which even though Ellie’s
story isn’t necessarily queer, she is a queer
person, and her entire story is about enduring
immense amounts of suffering
and trauma. Gratuitously so…
It’s unfortunate that we have a game in
which, even if Naughty Dog didn’t make the
claims themselves, Ellie is perceived to be
the first gay protagonist in a game and yet
this game is so divisive even among the queer
community. Many of us having lived through the
90s and early 2000s of gay media have reached
a saturation point of gay suffering narratives.
It’s difficult to say on one hand
that it gets better, but on the other
hand celebrate a glowering totem of media
about gays for whom it certainly does not.
Gays, these days, are tending
to lean towards media that is
queerly optimistic, or media where queer
characters are either triumphant or where
emotional growth is achieved
in spite of romantic failures.
That doesn’t necessarily mean that The Last of Us
2 is bad representation. I love that it doesn’t
give the player a choice other than to play
as a lesbian. And It’s far from a bad game,
and Ellie’s story is still significant even
as a queer narrative because regardless of
whether we want media that depicts us outside
of suffering, queer suffering still exists.
But as I’ve mentioned, The Last of Us 2 is far
from the first game to depict queer characters.
In fact when The Last of Us 2 swept gaming
awards (in spite of the studio, Naughty Dog,
demanding overtime from their employees, which
in the gaming world is called ‘crunch’ and is
exactly what you should not have needed to do
if your game won ‘best direction’) — detractors
who said that it shouldn’t have won
were decried as being ‘homophobic.’
Which I feel like a lot of that came from
allies who just assumed that if someone
didn’t like The Last of Us 2 it was because you
didn’t like that Ellie was a lesbian. Which…
doesn’t really help a discussion of our
representation in media because if someone
doesn’t like the type of representation, there’s a
perfectly valid discussion to be had about how to
make it better. And by putting it on a pedestal
that is beyond reproach, you’re going to paint
the entire fanbase as a cult which actively
denies any shortcomings the media does have.
No media is perfect and therefore,
no media is beyond scrutiny.
Especially because many people saying
The Last of Us 2 shouldn’t have won all
the awards it did were saying that it should
have gone to Hades instead. But The Last of
Us 2 stans mostly did not know what Hades was and
doubled down and called you Homophobic some more.
Completely oblivious to the fact that Hades is
probably even more gay than The Last of Us 2.
It was just made by a small studio
and has taken over a year to reach
the level of cultural permeance it has.
But Hades is still getting fanart while
the media narrative has largely
forgotten about The Last of Us 2.
But make no mistake, Hades, a game set in
the Hellenic underworld of ancient Greece,
is incredibly gay. You play as the relatively
obscure mythological figure: Zagreus, the god of
cycles and rebirth. Son of Hades and Persephone,
and sometimes is an alter-ego of Dionysus.
Though in the game he’s just the sassy prince
of Hell with a heart of gold and abs of steel.
The game’s story focuses around Zagreus’ quest to
escape the underworld and reunite with
his long-lost mother on the surface.
And on the way, he encounters a number of
Olympic and Chthonic figures from mythology.
The story both celebrates and subverts a
number of tropes in Greek myth, and places
itself in the historic context of life in ancient
Greece, before modern homophobia existed. And as
a result, nobody really raises an eyebrow at
instances of queerness and sexual liberation.
For instance, both Achilles and Patroclus are
characters here, and it’s no secret that they’re
both depressed because they have to live in an
eternity in hell apart from each-other. There is
a significant side-quest about getting them to see
each other again — and then they’re happy gays.
Happy gays! What a concept.
I mean they’re already dead, so it would be a
pretty tough job for writers to pull a
kill-your-gays on us in that situation.
But Achilles even openly discusses his
relationship with Patroclus with other
residents of Hell, without any pushback. Nobody
gives it any thought, and nobody questions why
Achilles is so attached to another man. They’re
not… very good friends. They’re boyfriends.
However, that’s not all.
Zagreus himself has a few romanceable NPCs.
One of them, Megara, is more of a contemptuous
hate-sex kind of deal. Frenemies with benefits?
And the benefit is that Megara gets to peg
Zagreus at her leisure. And it’s not subtle.
You know what also isn’t subtle? Thanzag.
At some point in your journey
upwards, you encounter Thanatos,
the god of peaceful deaths.
Who is… not at all happy that
Zagreus decided to leave without saying
goodbye. And while it’s only inferred
that they used to be an item, it certainly
is not just inferred that they want to be.
I find it interesting that the NSA sex
relationship in the game is with a woman.
And the pining, romantic, ‘you make me feel
so (not) alive’ romance is with another man.
Now… technically these qualify as romantic
‘options’ and they don’t have any bearing on
the main quest of the game. However, this is one
of those games with a ‘secret’ or ‘true’ ending.
Where, if you complete the
social fetch quest of each god,
you do get the true ending. And you can only
get this by going through the gay romances.
Because even if you turn down Thanatos (which…
I never have and I’m not sure if you actually
can?), you still have to go through Achilles and
Patroclus’ very drawn-out relationship
drama. And also Theseus and Aristeus.
But even then, in spite of all of this, there are
many who continue to refute Hades as having queer
representation. At least, the kind of queer
representation they want. And then proceed to
scream at Activision for more queer characters.
Which feeds back into the problem I mentioned.
When Blizzard, which is owned by
Activision, canonically confirmed
that the Overwatch characters, Tracer
and Soldier 76, were homosexual…
well you’d think it would have generated
more of a buzz than it did. Overwatch had,
for a few years, been the most celebrated
competitive E-sport in the world.
And taking the female character most
sexualized by male fans, and the most stock
FPS call-of-duty derived machismo character
and making them gay — that’s quite a move.
But they were only confirmed to be gay
in a cross-promotional comic book tie-in.
And there are not any clear references to
his sexual orientation in the game itself.
Which… back to square one I guess. So big
studios manage to squeeze in these little,
ignorable details of queerness, and then media
commentators on Twitter — queer-directed media
commentators no less — treats it as if we have
received a gift that we need to be grateful for.
Never-mind the slew of indie-developed
games which feature queerness prominently,
like Hades. Queer identity has
flourished in visual novels,
dating sims, and pixelated retro-style
platformers. Indie games are usually made
by incredibly small studios and in some
cases may be run entirely by queer staff.
When we talk about representation in gaming,
sure, we’ve got Ellie from The Last of Us 2.
But we’re also going to re-open
this discussion about Iron Bull
and how he somehow makes BDSM even more
boring than it was in 50 Shades of Grey.
We’re almost never having a discussion about Dream
Daddy, Life is Strange, or… Neko Jishi…? Which
I’ve never heard of but I’m sure it’s wholesome.
But even though we got a bestselling
tripple-A game that gave you no choice
but to play as an out lesbian, and protect
a trans man in order to finish the game,
and we got a pro-queer indie game that was by
far more successful than anyone anticipated,
the future of queerness in
video games is still uncertain.
In spite of a very recent influx of
queer-inclusive gaming, I don’t know
if we’re on the brink of a queer renaissance
in gaming. I don’t want to cast any disrespect
on many of these developers and studios, but
of the examples listed above, only Naughty Dog
is considered a ‘large’ developer. Due in part to
how it at least functions as a subsidiary of Sony.
The other games, Hades, visual novels, dating
sims, are produced by very small, very niche
developers. These games are in no way meant to
hit the big kind of broad-audience sales numbers
like The Last of Us was expected and required to
hit. Hades was this weird omnisexual anomaly that
oversold in a way even Supergiant Studio neither
expected nor were they prepared for. In fact,
towards the end of development, studio heads
were convinced the game would be a massive flop.
Who wants to be trapped in a hellscape where
it is functionally impossible to escape?
Who could possibly identify with that scenario?
But then suddenly we were all trapped
at home during a pandemic and we really
identified with Zagreus’s attempts to escape hell.
And yet, in spite of some very weird breakout hits
like Hades and like Dream Daddy and Stardew Valley
— whose sales numbers by far exceed many Triple-A
games — there is a strong reluctance for studios
to commit to these kinds of gameplay experiences.
Not to mention, their queer inclusive content.
And as much as we, queer people, are
represented in indie games and smaller
projects, a huge amount of the demand for
queer rep is on larger studios. Which is…
kind of immediately setting
ourselves up for failure.
It’s like expecting a gay
disney princess all over again!
Studios… aren’t inherently bigoted.
Executives operate on two paradigms:
follow the money, and break into untapped markets.
They do what’s popular because it’s shown to sell.
This is indicative of the slew of soft-palate,
cell-shaded, nature-focused, anime-realism
adventure games that started popping up
about 4 years after Breath of the Wild.
If a trailblazer takes on a new format that ends
up doing well, you can guarantee that others will
follow. Not even always out of a need to ape on
the popularity of a given aesthetic or mechanic,
but also because smaller developers want
to pay homage to inspirational games.
Both of these instances are clear
with the torrent of Dark Souls clones.
All this to say that, yes, studios and developers
are interested in representing queer characters.
If they can make a game that
the gays flock to en masse,
they’re more than happy to take our money. Same
thing with women, characters of colour, disabled
people, and any combination of the bunch. And
specifically in regards to queer representation
and women leads, there have been marked strides
in how well these games will draw in an audience.
However, as was discussed with The Last of
Us 2, there is a risk associated with this.
Though it’s grip is slipping,
‘Boys-Will-Be-Boys’ sensibilities
still dominate a significant
swath of Video Game spaces.
There are many cis men who celebrate games
that feature women or queer characters.
In fact, some people make a special point of
playing the queer romance options in RPGs.
Regardless of the support, there
is still a loud, if not large,
section of the video game player-base
who will stage petty boycotts and spam
review sites with one-star ratings
if a game has a queer character.
Would a Triple-A studio risk an original
IP with this kind of boycottable diversity?
When it comes to female protagonists…
it’s difficult to plot a pattern.
Studios don’t seem to be able to
pull in much money from exploiting
big-boobs like with Ivy from the Soul
Calibre series these days. In fact,
fighting games seem to be the only place it can
get pulled off. And even then that’s probably
less about titilation for straight men and
more about serving hot luuks for gay men…
Who happen to be one of the most
significant markets for fighting games.
You’d think Mortal Kombat would have kept their
first openly gay fighter around when they released
MK11 since they patted themselves on the back to
no extent when they released him in MKX. But no.
Though one could say that a lack of sexual
availability is what triggers the bigoted gaming
audience… Many blame Ellie’s controversial
backlash less on her sexual orientation,
and more on the fact that she presented a
femininity which was not meant to depict her
as available for the straight male gaze. This was
a similar criticism for the Captain Marvel movie.
As well as the protagonist from another
Playstation exclusive — Horizon Zero Dawn.
Aloy, while sexually ambiguous, is still to
this day the subject of many digital artists
‘fixing’ her appearance. Namely by
angling her jawline, narrowing her face,
removing her freckles, darkening her
ginger hair, and giving her a smile.
Ladies I’m not sure if you’ve heard, but
apparently you really need to smile more.
But while we have a slew of female protagonists in
games where we can try and scrutinize a
pattern about marketable representation,
we really don’t have that much data
on how to sell queer characters.
Yes, as I said, we are represented in many smaller
games and simulators. However, when general fans
demand more queer representation, they’re a
little bit put off when you recommend Celeste.
There’s this attitude that a video game means less
if it’s made with pixel art or 2-D animations.
This isn’t necessarily a tried-and-true
glass ceiling. (See Hades.)
But there is a sense of hierarchy
among video games. This is indicative
of Nintendo’s decision to release
Metroid Dread at full price, whereas
‘fans’ slammed them because the game wasn’t
as graphically intensive as say God of War.
So when fans demand representation, they are
demanding representation in games like this.
But reject representation in smaller games, or
at least ignore it. The assumption here is that
those games don’t matter as much because they
aren’t meant to reach the kind of wide-audience
that Call of Duty is meant to. But a gay
person in call of duty? That, apparently,
is a larger indication of queer acceptance.
Never-mind that Ronald Regan respecting
your pronouns is about the most ridiculous,
politically-charged, unnecessary virtue-signalling
I’ve ever heard of in gaming. Which, in turn,
leads Gamergate to believe that this is
what we, queer people, want from gaming
representation — intrusive, emersion-breaking
experiences that don’t need to be there.
Hey gamer bros? Queer people
actually hate that too.
We dont want Ronald Regan respecting our
pronouns. We don’t want him anywhere.
But maybe on the other hand, Activision has
an agenda to woke-wash Regan-era policies.
So representation in Celeste or dating sims
regardless of their popularity does not register
as representation because these games are not
considered to have an audience large enough
to consider their depictions impactful.
...By us. By queer people. It’s us. We’re
the ones putting the hierarchy there.
We’re the ones who demand queer representation,
but don’t show up to put money down for the
people who are already giving it to us. We seem
to have an aversion to supporting smaller studios.
Or even worse, we dismiss some kinds of video
games as simply being ‘not real video games.’
Which is a problem through the entire
gaming industry — but we’re the ones
asking for something specific in this case.
It’s kinda rude of us to flock to large
studios at the slightest mention of
queerness while ignoring smaller developers
— sometimes even queer-run themselves.
And in some cases, queer media will heap on praise
for even the smallest instance of representation.
Like when Lego Avengers included Wiccan
and Hulkling as playable characters.
Who were not in the story. And you could only
unlock them at the very very end of the game.
And they had no effect on the game
except to get 100% completion.
Why is gay media more interested in celebrating
a straight-run corporation with a board
of straight directors and predatory straight
management for making a financially-calculated,
bare-minimum effort to represent us? Rather
than, you know, showcasing queer developers
and smaller studios who produce labours of
love aimed at depicting our own stories?
Queer news media does have a phenomenally shallow
scope of what it chooses to cover… In most cases.
By the time queer news broke the
story on Hades’ queer themes,
the game had already been a top seller
on the Nintendo Switch for months.
And yet it’s queer media that will lift up
Bioware for showcasing yet another gay romance
which you can choose to ignore.
Like I said before, all of this smacks of
the Disney issue all over again. Where we’re
begging giant corporations to represent us.
The difference being, there’s actually swaths
of queer content already existing in the video
game space. From small independent developers.
Sometimes those games are leagues better than
the ones put out by AAA studios. I personally
really like The Last of Us 2, but I put a hell of
a lot more time into winning over the affection
of a certain Gridball playing stud in Stardew
Valley than I did on Ellie’s quest for revenge.
So instead of begging the AAA
giants to pay attention to us,
let’s help little games like
Stardew Valley and Hades
become giant hits. Let’s support the people who
are already supporting us, not the ones who think
we need to convince them that we’re worth
their time. Don’t we already do that enough?